In this video, we're
going to create
a calendar table using DAX.
In the previous video,
we saw how easy it was to
create a date model in Power BI.
But if you're going to be
doing any analytics dates,
it's a really good idea
to have a calendar table.
We're going to look at how
to create one of those.
There are actually
quite a few options.
You could actually import a
calendar table using Power Query.
You can even generate
a calendar table
using the M language
in Power Query,
and there are few scripts around
that that you can
download from the web.
Alternatively, and
arguably a little easier,
you can create a table
using DAX in Power BI.
That's what we're
going to do next.
To begin with, we're
going to need to
come to our Data View.
So select your Data View button.
This will activate the
table tools within,
and on the far right, we're
going to select New table.
To create the new table,
we're going to need
a DAX expression.
We're going to start with
giving our new table a name.
I'm going to call it calendar,
and then we're going
to type equals.
There are two functions that will
allow us to create
a calendar table.
If you type C-A-L-E,
you'll see there's
CALENDAR and CALENDARAUTO.
CALENDARAUTO will
automatically generated
based on the dates
already in your data.
CALENDAR gives you a
little more control,
so that's the option
we're going to use.
Here we just need to specify
a start date and an end date.
Our data starts on the
1st of July, 2017.
But I can't just
type that because
that's obviously
going to be text.
So I'm going to need to
use my Date function.
Then I can specify
the year, 2017,
the month, which is July,
and the day which is the 1st.
That will actually convert
those values into a date for me.
Now I type a comma. Now, I
want to make this a bit dynamic.
I could use the
Today function and
add a certain number
of days onto that.
But what I'd actually like
to do is get the date
60 days after my my
last order was placed.
I'm going to need to get
the biggest older date.
Yes, you guessed it.
I need the Max function.
We're going to type MAX.
Then I'm going to type
O-R-D for orders,
and make sure you've
selected orders Order Date.
Close your bracket for
your max function.
Now we're going to
add 60 onto that.
Then close your bracket for
your calendar and press Enter.
How brilliant was that?
We've seen that DAX cannot only
create measures and
calculated columns,
it can even create tables.
Now, one really important step,
we need to mark this
as a date table.
Back in your ribbon, can
you click the Mark as
date table and then select
Mark as date table.
Our date column is
going to be our date,
and we're going to click Okay.
That way Power BI knows to
use this table for
anytime intelligence.
If you would like to reformat
your date column just select it,
come to the Column tools, Format,
and you get some options
that relate to your
regional settings.
Choose any one you like.
I'm going to go for this one.
There's my date nicely formatted.
When we start working with
this information however,
we're probably going
to want to be able to
filter our data by
year and month.
We're going to need a
few additional columns.
To do this, we're going to create
some calculated columns,
again using DAX.
Let's start with getting
the year for each date.
On our Column tools tab,
we're going to come
to the New column,
and this first column is
going to be called year.
I'm just going to use
the year function,
so exactly the same as Excel.
YEAR open my brackets
and the date
I'm trying to get the year
from is my calendar date.
So if you type cal and
select Calendar Date,
close your brackets
and press Enter,
we can now see the
year for each date.
We can do something almost
identical for month.
I'm going to click New Column
and I'm going to type Month,
but the month function
is actually going
to return a Month Number.
Let's put Month Number
and type equals
and then MON and tag to
select month and again,
I'm converting the
calendar date to
a month and when I press Enter,
I get the Month Number
for each month.
In my charts however,
if I get 7's and 6's it's
going to look a bit odd.
I'd probably prefer to
have the month name.
One more column. Let's
click New Column.
This one I'm just
going to call Month,
and I'm going to type equals,
and you probably know in Excel
you would use the text function.
But index, there is a
slight difference here.
We saw this last week.
We use the format function.
Can you type for and
tab Select Format,
the value we're trying to
format is our Calendar Date,
and we'd like to
format that to see as
an abbreviated month
names so, "mmm,
if you want the full
month name, mmmm,
if you want the day
of the week, D's,
so nice and easy.")
and press Enter.
Our calendar table is
starting to take shape.
Let's go and see it in action.
I'm going to come back
to my report view,
and for this one, I'd like
to add an area chart.
Coming across my visualizations,
can you find area charts,
just to the right of
line charts and click.
They were going to resize.
It runs the whole way
across the sheet above
our existing visualizations and
I'd like to see revenue by year.
I'm going to start
by adding year to
my access fields and then I'm
going to come to my Order Items
and find my revenue
measure and just tick.
Now that's looking
really strange,
hard to believe I've had
a consistent 18 million
revenue across four years.
Something really important
I've forgotten to do.
Yeah, I haven't created
the relationship
in my data model.
This is really important.
You must have those relationships
that everything to work properly.
We're going to come
back to our model.
When I take my
properties panel away,
there's my calendar table.
Let's put this on the right over
here and what I
need to do is grab
date and link that to
order date on my orders.
Just make sure you've drag
the one onto the other.
There's my relationship and
now if I come back into
my report view that's
looking much better.
Don't forget those relationships.
That's looking good,
except I'm a little
concerned about the way
my sales appear to be
tanking from 2019 to 2020.
So let's add another
visual so we can
actually get a better idea of
what's happening in the data.
I'm going to click into the
bottom right corner and this
time I'm going to add a matrix
such as find the matrix.
This looks a lot
like a pivot table
in Excel and I'd like
to see revenue again.
Just select Revenue
and for my row labels,
I'd like to use month,
make sure you didn't
choose month number
and for my column labels,
I'd like to use year.
But that's really hard
to read because you can
see it is sorting the
months alphabetically.
We saw exactly the same
problem in part with it.
Let's see how we can
really easily fix this.
Coming back to our data view,
what we need to do is change
the sort order on month.
Now just click away from
the month table from there,
just click back and
you'll see that
the sort by column
is now activated.
We're going to click on that
and we actually want to
sort the month column
by month number.
This is a fantastic feature.
You can choose to
sort any column by
any other column and
if we come back into
our report view,
that is looking a
whole bunch better.
Now we can see what
the problem is.
The revenue is actually being
collected from July to June.
I don't actually have 12
months worth of data for
2020 because this company
runs on a fiscal year basis.
The fiscal year starts in July.
What we're looking at actually
here is from July to June
here that is the fiscal
year 2018 's data.
But unfortunately at this point,
my visualizations are not
reflecting that. They
actually look long.
This is where a calendar can be
so powerful because
you can set it
up to run according to
any calendar that
suits your business.
What we're going to
do now is go back
into our data view and add
a few extra columns to
accommodate fiscal
year and fiscal month.
Back into our data view
and we're going to add
a new column and
the first one we're
gonna do is fiscal year.
We're going to type
fiscal year equals.
Now we going to need
an if function because
if the month is July or after,
we need to add one to
the calendar year.
If it's before July,
we don't need to add anything.
We're going to put our
little if function
is in and again,
identical to excel.
A logical test is going to
be based on month number.
I'm just going to type calendar,
but I'm going to
select month number
and I'm going to check if
that is greater than six.
If it is, I'm going to
need to add one to
my calendar year.
I'm going to type calendar,
select a year, and add one.
If it isn't, I'm going
to leave it as is.
So calendar year is just
going to be calendar year.
Now I'm going to click enter,
and you'll see my fiscal year for
July 2017 is actually
showing up as 2018.
That's working really nicely.
Now fiscal month, July is July,
what's going to change
is the sequence.
I'm going to need to calculate
a fiscal month number,
which I can then sort
my fiscal month by.
New column and this is going to
be fiscal month and I'm going to
do [inaudible] is equal to,
and we need another
if function here,
similar to the last one.
I'm going to check if
my calendar month number
is greater than six.
But this time, if it
is greater than six,
I'm actually going to subtract
six because if it's July,
I want it to be
first in the list.
I'm going to take six away.
It's going to be month number,
calendar month number
obviously subtract six,
then a comma if it isn't,
if it's January to June,
I'm actually going to
need to add six because
those are the last
ones in the list.
Again, calendar month
number plus six,
close my bracket and press
enter and you see
now July is showing up as
fiscal month number one,
which is exactly what we need
to sort our fiscal month.
Then let's add that last column,
this is a nice easy one,
so we're just going
to click new column.
This is our fiscal month
and that's literally
just going to be
equal to our calendar month,
and then press enter.
Just one thing we
need to change there,
we need to sort this by
fiscal month number.
Now let's go and
fix up our report,
back into report view.
We're going to start with
our area chart and I'm going
to get rid of the years.
I'm just going to
click the little cross
next to year to remove it
and then I'm going
to grab fiscal year
and drop it into the axis.
That's much better, you
can see we've actually
had a steady increase in revenue.
Now coming to our matrix.
I'm going to get rid of month
and instead I'm going
to add fiscal month,
but make sure its fiscal month
not fiscal Month Number.
You can see that
sorting very nicely,
and then I'm going to
get rid of the year,
and I'm going to add
fiscal year to my columns.
That's looking terrific.
Really powerful feature,
including a calendar
table in your model.
For your challenge homework,
I'd like you to add day,
quarter, and fiscal
quarter to your calendar.
When you're done, join
me for the next video.